[Music]
Welcome to Signals and Threads, in-depth
conversations about every layer of the
tech stack from Jane Street. I'm Ron
Minsky. It's my pleasure to introduce
Ian Henry. Ian is a software engineer
here at Chain Street who's worked
actually on a bunch of different areas
and we'll talk about that a little more
in a second. I also should apologize to
the listeners and that my voice is a
little raw, so sorry about that, but
hopefully it won't be too rough to
listen to. Anyway, Ian, thanks for
joining me. Thank you, Ron. And just to
start off, can you tell me a little bit
about what you did before you worked at
Jane Street? Yeah, so I joined Jane
Street in 2016. And before that, the
bulk of my work experience was a company
called Trello, project management
software. I worked on a lot of the iOS
app and also the web front end. I worked
a little bit on the back end too, but
most of my time there was doing more
front-end engineering. After Trell, I
worked at Warby Parker doing iOS and
then came to Jane Street and I've worked
on our internal exchange software and
most recently on the options desk
working on tools for traders. That
transition is a little bit of like a
record scratch moment like started off
working on front end and iOS apps and
now you're working on exchange software.
Can we like just talk for a little bit?
How did you get here? Why did you come
here? How did you find yourself in this
very different corner of the tech stack?
Yeah, the thing that attracted me
initially to Jane Street was the
functional programming reputation. I had
started doing functional programming in
my spare time both in iOS using more
functional libraries back in 2013. We
had something called reactive coco and
functional reactive programming and it
was this really big wakeup call that
just made it a lot easier to build
complex interactive UIs using the iOS UI
kit framework. That was just such a big
productivity boost. And then my
functional education continued with
Closure. There was actually this library
for making music in Closure. It was this
creative coding environment called
Overtone. And I had never used Closure
before. I hadn't really used a
functional programming language at all.
But I was playing around with it and
making music. And having a real actual
programming language attached to the
music software meant that I could do
like really dumb things like have a MIDI
keyboard hooked up that I could send web
requests with or make a Slackbot that
you would type a message and web hooks
would cause it to play music using like
a synthesizer that you programmed. And
the experience with Closure sort of got
me into this functional programming
world and I started learning hasll
because I was curious what a monad was.
People kept talking about how it was
this great thing that would make your
programs easier to express and I wanted
to know what that meant. So I was just
doing Haskell for fun and then Jane
Street was a company in New York City
that was known for functional
programming. I didn't actually think I
could get a job at Jane Street but I had
a friend who started working here and I
feel like at the time it had this
reputation for being like you have to
have a PhD and various things in order
to work here and like I don't know. I
think that's like a reputation we've had
for a long time and it's kind of never
been true. Yeah. Like I have a PhD.
That's true. But there's really not a
lot of PhDs wandering around. Like if
you go to like the Okamel language team
and the people who are doing type theory
stuff, it's like not everyone, but
there's a fair number of PhDs kicking
around there. I do think somehow our
reputation has become more fearsome than
is exactly accurate. Yeah. I feel like
our public-f facing image is more on the
o camel compiler type theory extreme
side and like we like hiring engineers.
This is like a little bit my fault I
guess. Can we go back to the music thing
for a second though cuz I've seen a lot
of these tools. I am like basically a
musical ignoramus and I've been to like
fun live coding events where people are
off writing little programs to generate
music. I've never experienced the music
generated this way as being particularly
good. I'm like curious what your
experience has been in this space. Well,
again, MIDI keyboard that is sending web
requests and making collaborative. I was
definitely not making music. I'd say I
was enjoying sound synthesis from a
theoretical standpoint, which is most of
my experience with music is the tools to
make it are more interesting than
actually trying to make music to me.
Amazing. Okay. So, you arrived at Jane
Street with experience as an iOS
developer and you said we do a lot of
that here. Yeah. you should go work on
this Exchange software with no
interfaces or UIs or anything. Yeah, it
was a change of pace, but I didn't find
the transition particularly it it was a
good opportunity to do something
different. It was my first time that I'd
really thought about low latency
programming in any capacity like we
measure things in microsconds working in
internet facing companies like
everything is measured in milliseconds.
That was a bit of a change. Three orders
of magnitude right there. Yeah. Jean
Street, the software I was working on,
we would use a millisecond as sort of
shorthand for like something has gone
horribly wrong and it took an infinite
amount of time. It's over a millisecond.
We can't even measure it. It's also
maybe worth saying exchange software.
What are we talking about? Like Jane
Street doesn't run an exchange. What is
this kind of software actually for? So,
it's not really an exchange, but it is a
program that looks like an exchange and
exposes an API like an exchange to other
counterparties who can come and trade
with us using the same roughly protocols
that they use to trade on real
exchanges, but it's really a single
dealer platform, which means that people
can come in, they can put in orders, but
they're only necessarily trading against
Jane Street. They're not trading against
one another. It's not an exchange in
that sense, but from a software
perspective, it looks like an exchange.
We have an order book. We send in
orders. There's a matching engine that
causes trades to happen. We have
software that will print the trades to a
public tape after the trade occurs. It
is very exchangelike. Okay. So, we did
all this like weird low latency, high
performance work. Also, by the way, you
came here for functional programming.
That's a very imperative codebase. Yeah.
But we use some fancy type system tricks
to make the imperative programming very,
very safe. We use the phantom type
parameters in our JDTs to make sure that
we're efficiently deserializing data,
but we're not actually ever actually
deserializing it. You get a little bit
of that. You still get to leverage the
language. I mean, I guess a general
point is people think of Okamel as a
functional programming language, and it
surely is that, but it's actually a
really good language for imperative
programming also. And a lot of the type
system features that are useful in the
context of functional programming work
perfectly well in imperative
programming. And that's a large part of
what we do here as well. Yeah. In
addition to that, although most of the
core of this application is this very
imperative style, very low latency
style, there's so much code surrounding
that core tight hot loop that can be
written in this very very high level
style, which is something that's so nice
about using Okamel for you can go from
this very low-level style to this very
very high level style in your test
frameworks or something where you're not
concerned about this, but you're using
the same language, you're using the same
types, you're doing everything in the
same codebase. if you don't have this
context switch from calling into a CFFI
or something. Yeah, this is what's nice
about having what you might call a
broadspectctrum language. The language
that can be used in lots of different
styles for solving lots of different
kinds of problems, but the whole thing
fits together as a cohesive hole. It's
just easy to plug things together,
whether you're doing, as we'll talk
about soon, web programming or testing
systems or low latency stuff or whether
you're doing hardware synthesis and
having all of this kind of stuff fit
together is really great. Okay, so now
you're doing something very different
again. You're no longer working on that
exchange- like infrastructure. Tell me
more about the spot where you are now.
So, a few years ago, I started working
on the options desk specifically in a
team called Trader Tools. And we make
tools that Jane Street's manual traders
use to understand what's going on in the
option markets and then also to
manipulate different things, systems,
configure our automated trading systems,
send manual orders, various
interactions, but it's mostly a data
collection, visualization, and alerting
and monitoring. There's options are
weird because there's so so many of them
and a trader who is trading Nvidia has
one symbol that they're thinking about.
A trader who's trading Nvidia options
has to think about hundreds of different
strikes and exps at different times. You
say just what's a strike and what's an
X? Yeah, sorry. And actually, while
we're here, what's an option? Yeah. So
options are Wikipedia, right? To buy or
sell something at a price by some date,
notably at a given price. At a given
price, right? So the strike is the price
that you are able to buy or sell the
option before the expiration date which
is when you lose the option if you have
not exercised it. And this low-level
description is maybe a little bit
obscure and hard to understand. It's
like why do I want the option to buy or
sell a security at a given price. One
way of thinking about what's going on in
the options market is even though it's
expressed through a lot of individual
derivatives, things that are derived
from the actual underlying say Nvidia
options derived from Nvidia, there's a
bunch of, you know, might be a hundred
things in what we, you know, might call
like the V surface or this kind of
collection of different securities
that's parsing out different parts of
the space. Really, what's the thing that
you care about in this space is actually
a relatively lowdimensional thing of
where in some sense trading things like
the volatility of a given underlying,
right? How valuable is it to have the
option to buy something at a given price
depends on how likely it is for the
underlying to get to that price which is
something about how much volatility how
much likely movement is there in a given
security. So in some sense it's a way of
trading these deeper underlying
properties of securities that go beyond
just what is it trading at right now and
more about various distributional
properties of how that's going to move
around in the future. Yeah. And this
sort of impedance mismatch between we
are thinking about these as these
collection of moments and that is the
thing that we're actually trying to
trade but the way that we're doing this
is trading on markets with central limit
order books and we're trying to express
this opinion across the entire
individual markets which all have
individual orders and we need software
that sort of helps us move from the way
that we actually want to think about the
options and the way that we actually
trade the options in the real world.
Right? And it's maybe worth saying that
this whole effort on the options desk to
build a bunch of really highquality user
interfaces for people is relatively new.
It's only a few years old. And the
options desk, like the rest of Jane
Street, mostly spent its time acting as
if user interfaces were not a thing. Or
to the degree we had user interfaces
like they might have been in Excel or a
surprising amount of bash went into and
probably there's still more of that bash
kicking around the desk than maybe is
entirely optimal. Yeah, I think bespoke
curses app was our main UI for a long
time. Yes, that's right. Still is.
Right. And here curses is like a library
from the 80s for abstracting over
different terminal emulators,
state-of-the-art library, right? And the
terminal emulators were emulators for
physical hardware that people used to
use when using computers in the past.
And that hardware has not existed for
like 30 or 40 years. And here we are
still writing terminal apps through this
very strange pipeline of software. Yeah.
Okay. Okay, but we kind of changed our
approach here and even though we still
have some of those curses apps kicking
around, we've now gone off and built a
bunch of different user interfaces. Can
you maybe sketch a little bit of like
what are the purposes of these
interfaces? How are they trying to help
the end users? I think there's two broad
classes which is exploration,
understanding what's going on in the
markets and these are more tools for
data aggregation. We have a lot of
charts or graphs of how things have
moved over the course of a day. We have
ways to view not just an individual
option and what it is doing but maybe an
entire und and expiration date what's
going on across all the options in that.
We have tools for understanding this.
And then the second class of application
are tools for managing traders
attention, tools for alerting, tools for
getting their attention and saying,
"Hey, something interesting is happening
that you probably aren't thinking about
because you have a million different
things that you're thinking about like
trying to get their attention, alerting
them to interesting trading
opportunities that we can either find
automatically or that traders have said,
I want to know when the following thing
happens. I suspect this might happen. I
want to know as soon as it does." Right?
And the trading day is busy and part of
what's going on is also about aortioning
responsibility to different groups of
people. The option desk is big and there
are lots of different people paying
attention to different things and being
able to hand off responsibility between
people and groups of like you'll pay
attention to this and I'll pay attention
to that. A kind of workflow aspect of
it. Routing the interesting thing is
happening to the correct person is a not
very technically glamorous or
interesting problem but is surprisingly
hard and extremely important. Zoomed out
way too far. your previous experience
working on Trello and your current
experience working on tools here like
parts of that seem the same workflow
parts and guiding people's attention to
the thing that they're supposed to be
watching and stuff maybe not as real
time that's part of what tools like
Trello are like how do those two
activities feel different to you working
at this product oriented company that's
facing hundreds of thousands or millions
of users versus working at Jane Street
on tools where 150 is a pretty big
number of people who might use the
particular tool you build Yeah, it's
very very different in two ways. It's
very different socially. We're working
on tools for Jane Street Traders.
They're all internal and we sit near
them. We can walk over. They're on the
next aisle down. We can watch them using
our tools and they can directly ask for
features. We can understand what they
want. We can talk about it. We can write
code for them and ship it and see them
use it the next day. It's not this large
mass market software. we're making
something that is going to be used by
millions of people and we can't directly
talk to millions of people at once and
see what they're looking for. So, we
have this immediate feedback loop which
is really great. There's also this flip
side to it which is we're not making
mass market software that is going to be
used by millions of people. We're making
extremely niche software that's going to
be used by a few really really smart
people and the things that they want are
sometimes just understanding the domain.
We are not traders. We are engineers. We
have to learn enough about how traders
think about things and what they're
trying to do in order to give them the
features that they want. So it's in some
sense easier because you can do this
iterative design process to see exactly
what features you want and get feedback
that you have built the correct feature
and also harder because the features
themselves require some amount of domain
knowledge. So in addition to just
implementing the feature is difficult,
understanding and designing the future
is more difficult. I imagine there's
just a hard generalization problem here,
right? I think you have the usual
experience you have with users
everywhere. If you ask people what they
want, they will tell you some particular
thing which is kind of related to what
they want, but it's some complicated mix
of what they think is easy to achieve
and what they have in their head and
what narrowly solves the problem that
they just saw. And you have to stand
back and see something broader than that
and see like a simpler thing which will
solve more problems. And I guess it
seems hard to do that in a case where
you're to some degree at an information
disadvantage. Yeah. Where the users
understand more deeply what they're
doing. How do you come to grips with
that question? So, something that helps
a lot is people are very patient and
want you to understand their problems.
They're not just saying, "I want this
feature. Go do it." You're working with
the traders and you can say, "Okay, you
need to get me on the same page as you.
You're asking for this thing. I want to
understand this thing." This is true
generally of Jane Street. We have a lot
of educational resources. You want to
understand the domain well in order to
do your job better. But at the same time
a huge help is we have some senior
people on the desk who have been trading
for a long time and also have a lot of
UX intuition and ability to design and
we do lean on their experience for help
as we're working on some of the
features. Another thing I wonder about
in terms of like the difference between
working on a consumerf facing product
and working on the tools you're building
here which are essentially tools for
experts is whether that influences the
way we behave down to the level of
relatively smallcale UI decisions.
Absolutely does. One of the strangest
things when I started working on UI
tools at Jan Street is a lot of your
intuition from general what does good
design look like? Everyone at Jane
Street has roughly fighter pilot eyes
and they say I want this to be about six
pixels high because then I can fit more
of it on my screen. And you're designing
these tools with extremely high
information density. If you tried to do
something like that for a general
product company, you'd be like, "This is
unreadable. This is unusable. Traders
don't ever want to touch their mouse.
Everything is accessible from the
keyboard, which is a good additional
feature to have, but there's a lot of
discoverability problems that comes from
that. You can't hover to see more, to
see interactions because you don't have
a mouse to hover with because you're
trained on using curs's apps for your
whole career. And it's not just you're
trained on it, like it's actually
better, right? It is just a higher
bandwidth input mechanism to be able to
like quickly smash things out with your
fingers and it is move the mouse and
click on a thing. It's just dramatically
different. Yeah, not that we don't have
tools with mouse interactions, but the
information density is a big difference
and we don't spend as much time on
things like discoverability of features.
It is important, but ultimately your
users are kind of expert users who know
these tools and live in these tools and
use them all the time. So, we don't have
tutorials necessarily. We have vaguely
written help documents and getting
started and then the people around you
teach you how to use the tools to the
expert level that you have to, right?
Although I have seen nice features come
in. One of the great things you can have
in a web UI as opposed to a terminal app
is you can have tool tips and that's
pretty good and you can have links to
web pages. So you can have things that
show up and then you could click a link
and it can show up on the appropriate
page on our wiki where someone can go in
and in fact if the documentation isn't
good you can just crowdsource and to
dive in and go and modify it. And I've
seen some of those things kind of pop up
in the apps that you guys are building.
As the firm grows and there are more
people using these applications, it does
become more sensible to lean more in the
direction of having the tool teach you
what to do and incrementally less have
just the people around you always teach
you how to use it. It's absolutely true.
It's it's an evolving process. So, we
just talked a bunch about how the goals
are different and the things you're
building and the shape of the designs
you come up with. How about just the
process of writing code here? How does
that differ from things you've
experienced in the past? So writing
internal software there are so many
things that we would spend time on
making broad market internet distributed
software that we just don't have to
think about at all. So when we're
writing code at Jane Street we're almost
always thinking about the specific
application and the application logic
and we spend so much less time thinking
about these ancillary things that that
we used to spend time on at Trello for
example. And these are just things like
having accounts and logging in and
signing up and forgetting your password
or processing payments or distributing
resources over the internet because
everything is internal and we have these
very fast internet connections. We can
just download 5 megabytes of JavaScript
and never have to think about it. So we
can focus much more on the core
application logic that we're working on.
And this has this maybe unexpected good
and bad thing which is it's very easy to
spin up new applications as opposed to
this is the Jane Street app and we're
all working on the Jane Street app. We
actually have tons of web apps and if
you're working on a new feature maybe
you're going to start a brand new app
from scratch and deploy it because all
of these surrounding infrastructure
setting up your CDN and configuring
domains and all of this is roughly free
and the work that you're doing is just
working on the application. I think
another thing that I like about working
at Jane Street is we don't have just npm
update dependency constant treadmill of
keeping up to date with all of the
external libraries that you're using.
Something that took a surprising amount
of my time in a past life, right? I
mean, there's a little bit of some good
and bad in that. Part of what's going on
is Jane Street has to a kind of weird
degree been on its own parallel universe
software adventure for the last 20 years
where it's built lots of custom stuff
and it doesn't hook into the outside
ecosystem as much as you might expect.
There are like real compromises with
this on the JavaScript side. There are
lots of cases we've brought in useful
third party libraries and wrapped them
up. But we definitely don't do this
whole like oh just you know bring in
whatever packages like npm decided to
bring in. It's kind of problematic from
a stability perspective. It's also kind
of a security nightmare. So anyway,
there are lots of reasons why we want
more control over the ecosystem than
that. Yeah. Another thing that we've
talked about in the past that seems
pretty different is and that I've kind
of noticed myself in my own working just
at the level of file formats and
protocols and whatever. There's ways in
which we just use different sets of
things. Yeah. So at a very high level
you're focusing on the application and
then the application that you're writing
everything is written in Okamel the
client the back end and the front end
and most Jane Street engineers who are
working on these tools are really
working on full stack back end and front
end and there's very very blurred lines
between the two not only blurred lines
in the codebase sharing types but as you
said we have automatic serializers that
generate stable protocols between the
client and the server such that if you
have a value on the server it's roughly
one line of code to have the value on
the client. You sort of get that for
free. So you're not spending a lot of
time building your JSON API v1 v2 and
then writing the parser on the client
that consumes them and creates these
mirror image types that are hopefully
compatible with what your backend types
represent. We really just have the same
types and the same logic. This is really
powerful. We can do things like offload
computation from the server to the
client to sort of parallelize something
across all of the users who are doing
something. And we can just run the same
code. Oh, that's interesting. You can
move it from the server to the client to
parallelize it. Yeah. And you can also
move it from the client to the server to
make it faster and parallelizes
depending on how you have your resources
distributed. Yeah. Nice. Another point
on this which has always struck me as
just the degree to which we don't use
HTTP for everything. It's kind of like
this historical thing where we've had
Okamel RTC's and client server
communication all the time. And when we
stuck it in the browser, we just sort of
tried to move our existing Okamel
ecosystem into the browser pretty
closely. So you're immediately able to
use all of the existing servers and talk
to them the way that you want to. And we
don't use HTTP, we don't use REST, we
don't use any of these traditional
GraphQL, like anything that you would
see in the outside world. Instead, we
have bespoke generated okamel protocols
that work over these pre-existing live
update streaming RPC things that we have
built. when you're talking to your
server, you open a websocket connection,
you speak this language, and everything
happens over this channel. If we ever
wanted to make software for the outside
world, and we suddenly had to like
support the conventions that people are
used to and expose JSON RPCs, I think
we'd be at a pretty big disadvantage.
But not having to think about those
things internally and getting all of
that for free within the tools that
we're writing, it's a huge accelerator
for adding a new feature. I want to add
this new piece of data. You add it to
the record type, you populate it, you're
kind of done. There's no more type
bumping or anything. We do have to think
a lot about stability as we upgrade. And
clients are running different versions
of the server. And for the most part, we
own the users, we own their browsers,
and we can just force them to refresh
when they're need to pick up a newer
version. Yeah. And there's a certain
amount of joy of not having to think
about versioning. We care about
versioning in lots of places. It's
complicated and messy, but the cases
where you can just not worry about it
are glorious. a thing that's in some
ways I think of as weirder about the
outside world than about us which is
that HTTP has become synonymous with
network connection. Yeah. There's this
thing underneath called TCP which you
might have heard of which actually for a
lot of the things that people use HTTP
you could totally use TCP it works fine
somewhat lower overhead you have more
freedom there are other ports turns out
it's not all on like port 80 there are
other ports that you can use and other
protocols and somehow the outside world
has forgotten all of that and been like
no no no there's HTTP and HTTPS and
actually there's just HTTPS everything
should go over that and that's just not
the way our ecosystem is shaped at There
are custom protocols that we build.
There are lots of things that are just
kind of Raleigh on top of TCP IP. Also
TCP, you're getting high level already.
We built our exchange protocols. This is
all UDP multiccast. We don't have this
TCP thing. That's right. Too fancy.
Yeah. So another way in which the
programming ecosystem specifically on
the front end side is different is not
to break out of the usual Jane Street
doing our own different thing. We have
built our own frameworks for building
web UIs. This is a framework called
Bonsai. And I'm kind of curious how you
think of that as changing the experience
of building user interfaces here. Yeah.
So because we're writing Okamel, we sort
of had this question of okay, we want to
use Okamel to build UIs. What do we do
UI framework-wise? Building UIs is
pretty complicated. Managing state is
pretty complicated. Manipulating the DOM
is kind of fraught. And just to say,
there's a weird fact about the world
that you talk to kids out of school from
fancy undergraduate institutions and
they're like, "Ah, UI stuff. I don't
ever want to do that UI stuff. And at
the same time, it's actually one of the
richest, most complicated, most
interesting programming problems you'll
ever run into. And it's actually really
hard to do well. So this odd mismatch
where it doesn't get a lot of respect
and yet it's obviously important.
Building user interfaces that are good
matters to people. And it's really
challenging and interesting. Yeah, it's
really difficult and you end up thinking
about so many different pieces of state
and ongoing especially if you're
building something that is interactive
or building something like drag and drop
modeling these interactions as explicit
data types in ways that are both
accurate and robust. It's all pretty
difficult. I think part of the
reputation comes from like a lot of
front-end work is also working around
browser differences and
incompatibilities, learning how to do
CSS layout that works in different
versions of Edge or something. And like
we are fortunate to be able to ignore a
lot of the things that make front-end
development less pleasant and really
just focus on the interesting difficult
parts of it, right? We do not support
all the browsers in the world. Yeah.
Just the browser we like. one version of
Chrome then everyone's on the same
version. So that makes it I think not to
undercut your point of the general
front-end reputation is low. But yeah,
it is bizarre. I think building UIs is
incredibly hard and there's so many
different approaches and it kind of
seems like no one has exactly nailed it
and it is the reason there are so many
different UI frameworks out there is
that it's a very difficult problem and
no one's like really cracked it. So, of
course, we built our own to try to crack
it instead of trying to write Okamel
bindings to an off-the-shelf library and
we use Bonsai. A lot of what makes
writing front-end code at Jane Street
feel very different is that we're
writing it in Okamel. Not only this type
sharing isomorphic server client easy
protocol connection stuff that I was
talking about before, but also just we
have types. We have really really good
types. We have some types which are
really valuable for modeling a lot of
the state that you have in a front-end
application where you might have a value
on the client that you want to sync to
the server but it has not been synced
yet and the server thinks that the value
is this thing and you can build this
composite complex type and wrap all of
your types around it and have a
interaction monad. I've used sum type
several times. I was just about to say
what is a sum type and why does it
matter here? So many programming
languages give you a way to say I have
this and that and that. And more and
more increasingly languages are giving
you now a way to say I have this or that
or that. And I think Rust has this as a
big mainstream language that has
algebraic data types for the sum or and
product and which is just I don't know a
fancy word for a very intuitive idea.
But in Oakamel you can express something
like I have got this result from the
server or I am still loading this result
or I got an error from the server and
this is a sum type. It just means that I
have this or that or that. And a lot of
the just basic types that you're
thinking about when you're writing
frontends benefit immensely from being
able to say just exactly that I want to
load this thing and then if I get a
response I want to load this next thing
and expressing that as soon as I get an
error I want that to propagate through
the whole chain. You can make a monad to
do this and it makes it easier. The
monatic thing is for chaining some of
this error handling together in a nice
way. The basic underlying property of
these disjunctions, these sum types is
that they let you say this or that or
the other in a clear way. And then maybe
most importantly, there's a good
language facility for doing the case
analysis is this thing called a pattern
match where it lets you make sure that
you are exhaustively considering all the
cases. And it turns out in just an
enormous amount of programming is case
analysis and having tools that help you
do the case analysis and make sure you
do the case analysis correctly
exhaustively making sure that you don't
mix cases from different things that
you're actually looking at the thing
that you should be looking at is just
incredibly useful and comes up all the
time and it's kind of shocking that more
languages don't have it. You say it's
like oh increasingly there's more of it.
It's like sort of in the same way that
Rust is sort of a mainstream language.
It's just barely in the top 20 or
something. But actually, the vast
majority of languages don't have any
good support for this. And it really is
kind of a crying shame. The idea that
one would generate a new language past
the year 2000 without adding some types
just seems like a disaster. You kind of
forget when you work at Jane Street for
a long time. How do you write software
without this? So, a little bit spoiled
there, but especially on the front end,
I don't just have this string. I have
this string that is embellished in some
complicated way. Okay. And in order to
actually display that to the user, I
need to think about, well, what if it
failed to load? What do I do? And
depending on the tools you're using, it
can be easy to forget about that. And
Okamel makes you think about that every
time. The type system reminds you
anytime you want to use a value, well,
what if you failed to load that? What do
you want to do then? Right? So, there's
a fundamental trade-off here about
explicitness. Part of what the type
system is doing is just forcing you to
explicitly consider various cases. This
goes back to like another difference in
the language is many many languages have
some kind of null pointer or a null
value as an implicit part of every
value. So you have a type system that
tells you what's going on but it doesn't
let you distinguish when you do and
don't have null and you just have to
think about it carefully on your own and
make sure you get it right and it's all
just kind of implicit in the code and in
a language like Okamel this kind of
analysis is explicitly forced for you to
think about. Okay, so that's some ways
in which Okamel makes the process of
writing things different here. How about
Bonsai itself? Are there interesting
aspects of the design of that library
that affect what it's like to work in?
Yes. So, Bonsai is actually pretty
familiar if you're used to something
like React. It is a library that uses
vdom patching, diffing, and patching.
But unlike React where you have this
component tree, Bonsai is sort of this
pure functional core of okay, what if we
built a library for expressing
incremental state machines with internal
state at any levels of this complex
computation graph and then you put
virtual DOM nodes as some of the values
in that computation graph and you hook
up a machinery to apply virtual DOM
patching to a browser. The description
that I just gave is like this weird
functional programming nightmare. But
what it actually amounts to is React but
principled where instead of having like
your implicit component tree which can
sort of magically implicitly contain
local state through something called
hooks, instead you're just very explicit
about okay a component is a value that
can change over time. We have this VDOM
structure and it can change over time.
we have these other things over here
that are strings and ins and they can
change over time and we can produce UIs
that are pure functions of those strings
and insight and so the things I'm
hearing you saying is one difference is
that you have a more general computation
model right the react stuff is in some
sense specialized to computing a tree of
DOM nodes and Bonsai gives you a system
for computing any computation that you
want and then we happen to use it for
computing some DOM nodes or virtual DOM
nodes I think that we did set out to
write a good front-end framework. It's
just that it turns out that a good way
to solve the front-end framework is to
solve this more general higher level
problem. Yeah. And I think part of the
motivation there had to do with actually
some of the performance-driven issues,
right? I think one of the things that
makes building UIs in a trading
environment different is you have this
constantly changing stream of data
that's coming in that changes what you
need to display to users. And so there's
all sorts of incremental computations
that you want to do efficiently where
you're just reacting to the new data and
not having to refresh everything. React
has a lot of work to let you not have to
refresh the entire page. But here
there's also a complex computation where
you're like merging and combining and
transforming data and you also don't
want to redo all of that. And so I think
part of what drove us in a more general
direction was the desire to be able to
optimize more deeply the computations
that were going into what we were
displaying in the UI. Yeah. And then you
can also use that same mechanism by
which you can express this computation
graph at whatever level of granularity
you want to break up your UI into
whatever level of granularity you want.
you're not necessarily limited by like
okay this component is going to rerender
when its internal state changes and it
contains these subcomponents you can say
okay I have a single logical component
like I have a single function and it
contains these two pieces of UI I'm not
going to rerender the whole thing
whenever any of my state changes instead
this piece this particular bit of
virtual DOM is a function of these
inputs this other piece is a function of
these other inputs and you can choose
how granular you want to go with that to
really control your rerendering and get
better vdom
diff even as lots and lots of things are
changing all the time. Right? So, it's a
more general system that gives us some
extra powers in performance space. We
can optimize things better. It also
gives us some extra ability to break
things down into meaningful components
that are easy to think about
independently that aren't necessarily
just computing chunks of VDOM. So,
that's one difference. What are the
other differences that you see? Another
big difference is this explicitness. I'm
contrasting this to React because I
think that a lot of people know React,
but I am not really one of them. The
last time I used React professionally
was more than 10 years ago and I'm out
of date. Now there are hooks and I only
have a layman's understanding of this.
So a lot of the things that I'm going to
say about React are going to be probably
wrong in subtle ways and people can
hopefully not discount everything that
I'm saying based on that. But React does
a lot to give you this apparently simple
API. When you're writing a component and
using hooks, there's really this very
complicated reconciliation process
happening under the hood in order to
associate the state with the correct
component as you're rerendering things.
That amounts to I can create a state
hook that contains a string, but I just
have a string when I'm writing my code.
But you're sort of limited in what you
are allowed to do with that string. You
can't conditionally inspect the string
and then decide to create some other
amount of state based on the value of
the string. There are various ways that
you can like illegally write a React
component if you're conditionally
creating a hook or calling something a
variable number of times between
component invocations. And these are
things that llinters can catch for you.
And there are rules that you have to
follow in order to use React correctly.
and you know the rules and they're not
super ownorous, but there are certain
refactors that have the possibility to
introduce bugs. Bonsai sort of does not
try to do any of this implicit magic
sort of make it look like you're
creating this just regular variables
that you can just use like their
variables. Instead, it uses Okamel's
type system to really enforce this
separation of okay, you have a bit of
state that's changing over time. Well,
that is sort of like a promise
essentially. It's something that you
can't just look at it. You can't just
put that value into some DOM node. You
have to construct a new computation that
explicitly takes that as an input and
produces an output. We have very good
notation for expressing like I have an
input of these five computations. It's
not quite as annoying as use memo and
listing out every single input, but you
do have to be explicit at the level of
this particular computation as these
particular inputs. We use OKML's type
system to ensure that like you can't
forget to do this. If you did not
explicitly register an input, you just
can't use it on the other side. You're
just going to get a type error. So
although there are things that you could
write that would be wrong, the compiler
will check them for you immediately. And
you get this immediate feedback that
like ah you have you have done this
thing that is illegal. This sounds to me
a little bit like the trade-off between
C++ and Rust, which is in C++ or C for
that matter, there's a bunch of things
you have to do quite carefully when
you're writing code. There's all these
disciplines around when code is created
and freed and shared and modified and
how you are supposed to handle pointers
that are to values that are on the stack
and all of that. And there's nothing
explicitly forcing you to do it. You
just have to get it right. And when you
don't get it right, you're in crazy
undefined behavior land and you're going
to have a bad time and things are now
kind of hard to debug. And in Rust,
there's a much more explicit system for
tracking this. You essentially have
guarantees that you're getting it right.
And the trade-off there is there's a
bunch of extra complexity. There's like
a fancy type system that you have to
wrestle with and there's just more
typing. More characters are required
because you have to to be explicit about
like what is their discipline for
managing memory between these two parts
of the code and like what's the contract
between them? You actually have to write
that contract down rather than just
hoping that people roughly infer what it
is because they kind of know the style
of how this particular piece of code is
written. How well do you think that maps
on to what you see in the kind of Bonsai
versus React case? So the explicitness
is definitely there. You're definitely
typing more characters when you're using
bonsai than when you're using React. But
I think an important difference and I
wouldn't want people to get the wrong
idea is there are certain things that
are actually just harder to do in Rust
and they might be perfectly safe things
like I want to create a doubly linked
list in Rust and I want to do that
safely using the borrow checker. It's
like I don't know how to do that. That's
fundamentally very difficult to do in
Rust. And I think it's not difficult. I
think it's impossible. Okay. You
literally cannot create a doubly linked
list because it violates the core
constraints of safe rust. And so you
need to like go off and use some of the
extensions or explicitly use the unsafe
extensions of Rust. So it's like it's
doable but it is not trivial. I don't
want people to think that we're paying
such a high cost. Everything that you
can do in Bonsai, you can express
exactly what you would be doing in
React. There's nothing that is sort of
forbidden or offlimits. It's just that
it all has to be extremely explicit. But
you can model all the state. But for
example in React a mistake you can make
is you can render a list of components
without giving them an explicit key and
it'll warn you and it's not like it's
impossible to write React code
correctly. It's also not impossible to
write C code directly. We have val grind
we have lint all sorts of lers and
stuff. It's very similar in some ways.
The only way to render a dynamic number
of components forces you to provide a
key in order to do that. So it's not as
difficult. The rules are more directly
mapping from the rules that you are
already following to write correct react
code. We just have a type system for it.
Let's leave the world of code for a
second. I want to pop back to trading
for a bit. So we were talking before
about the difficulty of dealing with the
kind of information imbalance of like
you know a lot about software
engineering that the traders don't know
about. They know a lot about what they
are trying to do that you don't know
about. I imagine some of the process for
you has been learning more about it. How
has that gone? like what what has the
process been like for you of coming to
understand a little bit more like
options is an especially complicated
domain in the trading world I think for
a variety of you know down to like even
understanding symbology what security am
I trading what does it mean is a
surprisingly complicated affair and I'm
curious how has it been coming to grips
with everything from like how we think
about modeling options prices to the
details of the technology what's that
process been like for you it's very
humbling I would say it's definitely
shows that I'm would not make a good
trader and I'm better suited to stay an
engineer. We have really good internal
education for I think this is true for
all desks and all specific domains that
people have to understand at Jane Street
but there is a lot of education a lot of
explicit learning. The tools that we
work on are very broad and I feel like
at times I have to understand a lot of
different areas of options trading at a
sufficient level that I can program it
but we don't go extremely deep into any
particular small aspect of options as a
domain and we have more specialized
teams on the desk people who are work on
pricing people who work on computing
options fars or finding implied
volatility from the markets and they go
very deep into these more narrow domains
and like really understand this. I wish
that I did a little bit more of this to
be honest. I feel like building the
tools for understanding all of options
trading at once requires some amount of
like okay we have this piece of the
domain. I have to understand that well
enough but that is like one of the 40
different things that we're trying to
present to traders. So it is a little
bit of I don't know I definitely don't
feel like I could come out of this and
become an options trader. Instead, I am
have this very broad picture of all of
the different pieces that fit together.
But if you asked me to compute early
exercise decisions, I'd be like, "Okay,
hang on. I need to like go work out the
math for a little bit because it's not
something that I've done." So, education
is very good, but the tools specific
team is at this weird. You have to know
a little bit of everything. A little bit
of everything. And it's difficult and
it's humbling. There's a lot of things
to learn in this kind of environment.
What is it like actually improving
something? Can you give me an example of
like a problem that you've run into of
something where like the tools aren't
doing quite the right thing and you need
to work with people and with the traders
and try and make things better? Can you
make it a little bit more concrete what
one of these efforts might look like? So
something that I worked on recently is
we have a type of alerting of an
interesting thing is happening in the
market. We want to tell traders and
there's this frequent tension between we
don't want traders to miss an
interesting thing but we also don't want
to annoy them with constant this thing
is happening this thing is happening and
they're like all right come on like I
don't care. So balancing noisiness and
building more complicated rules for
whether something actually is important
and then maybe stateful interesting
things where conditional on the fact
that I have already told someone about
this how much less do I want to tell
them about the next time this happens
and we have timebased rules for don't
alert on this too frequently or increase
the threshold by which you know it's
moved this amount it needs to move more
in order for us to tell people again. So
a common type of improvement is I'm
hearing this alert too much and I would
like to hear it less. So all of the
things we do are very full stack. So
it'll start with okay we need some new
piece of data to say evaluate the
interestingness of a certain opportunity
and that requires learning various
things about the market or how much it
usually trades in order to say that this
is more interesting than usual. And then
ultimately we're going to do our best
and build these heruristics and talk to
traders and they're going to try it out
and say like, "Yeah, this seems better.
I'm not annoyed as much as I was
before." But then we often have these
thresholds or configurations. We want
traders to be able to ultimately they
know how often they want to hear about
things and they want to be able to
configure these things. So, Jane Street
has internally a lot of trader
configurable things and we leverage
existing infrastructure that we have for
traders to go in and tweak values, tweak
parameters, edit things about how often
they want to hear certain alerts. Yeah.
So, there's two problems I see you
talking about here. One is there's this
general kind of alerting the appropriate
amount problem like alert fatigue. It's
kind of a fundamental issue. And
actually I think a problem I imagine you
run into because I feel like it's a
problem we see everywhere with traders
is they underco complain about this
issue. I think they are subject to alert
fatigue but also James Street traders
just are socialized to have high pain
thresholds. If every day you need to
like come in and pick up a hammer and
hit yourself on the head three times and
then like slap your hand on the desk in
order to like turn the crank and make
the money. People will just do that over
and over. But in the end it's actually
not good for them and their efficacy and
their happiness. And so there's an issue
of actually you kind of want to
overreact to people's concerns in the
space. So that's like one problem. And
then one way you can deal with that
problem is you can give them dials. It's
like oh I'll give you some
configurations and you can modify it and
then you can push things back and now
you have another problem. Yeah. And we
don't want to offsource all of this work
to traders and be like all right it's
your problem now. We do want to get it
as close as possible but things happen
things change. We want to be able to
react to okay whoa whoa whoa. Because
things are so busy today the typical
thresholds that we've set are not
working well. So I want some way to
tweak that intraday and that's more why
we give configurable knobs rather than
just okay it's your problem you have to
go figure out what the threshold should
be. So do you end up taking lots of
different kinds of data and situations
and conditions and then packing them all
into one interestingness number or many
different notions of interestingness
that float around inside of the system?
For some systems, we do. For systems
that are looking at lots of different
types of interesting events and who want
to surface those and decide which of
those to surface, we have metrics for
roughly sorting them by interestingness,
sorting them by value, by how valuable
we think telling a trader about this is.
And then we have sort of global
thresholds that we can set for, okay,
because today is so interesting, I want
to like hear half as many alerts, I want
to double the like interestingness
metric, the threshold by which you're
going to actually play sounds on my
computer. I just want to take this up or
I want to take this up for this
particular asset class today. So we have
these knobs and often the thresholds get
sort of tuned stably over time and then
we just sort of relatively change them
to respond to changes in the market or
changes in busyiness. How do you avoid
ending up with just an unbounded amount
of configuration that persists over lots
of different people when new trader is
hired and they start like why is
everything terrible? Oh it's because you
have all the wrong knob set. How do you
make it so that like the default
experience of a new person is actually
good when you give people the ability to
adjust and tweak the system to match
their needs? Yeah, we've gotten better
at this over time and that is making
fewer per user knobs and more deskwide
knobs. So, if you particularly want to
hear less about this thing, probably
that means the entire desk wants to hear
less about that thing. After having
built too many bespoke configurable
things such that the people sitting next
to each other using these tools are
using completely different tools. We try
our best to unify these and give
deskwide configuration more than user
specific configuration. Some of the
again maybe different from what you
might see in some consumer products well
or maybe the same but there's some
amount of trying to make a better
experience by constraining what people
can do by taking away various kinds of
choice which I guess actually has
totally happened in consumer stuff I
remember in the good old days when you
used win amp or something you could have
all the UIs any UI you wanted right and
now the world has settled on you have
one bit you could be in light mode or
dark mode and that's it and everything
else is going to be managed centrally so
we've talked a bunch about the stuff
you've done here. You also have done a
bunch of interesting personal projects
over the years. I think one I've
personally enjoyed watching a lot is a
thing called Bobble. Can you maybe say a
few words about what Bobble is? Yeah, so
Bobble is sort of a live coding
environment. It is a website you can go
to and type a few lines of code and you
will get 3D images and animations from
that code. And if you've heard of
shaders or shader toy, it's a very
similar idea where you're writing a
program, it gets compiled to an OpenGL
shader, which is essentially a function
that runs on every pixel in an image and
says, "What color should this pixel be?"
And you can write very interesting
functions that say, "Okay, depending on
the position in the image, like I'm
going to maybe do ray marching. I'm
going to like do ray casting to compute
the color." And you can do surprisingly
complicated and intricate images just in
this pure function from pixel to color.
So I think of this as roughly a thing
that has been designed to run
efficiently on modern GPUs so that you
can do it really fast and at real time
and get high responsiveness doing chunks
of pixels in parallel such that it
happens very quickly and you can do some
really incredible realtime rendering and
a lot of people have if you look at
shader toy or the work of Indigo Keilles
it's really impressive how much you can
get the GPU to do but doing that
requires writing this kind of low-level
language called GLSL the OpenGL shader
language and then compiling it using
WebGL and rendering it. It's very low
level, which you'd expect for
programming a GPU, but I wanted
something extremely extremely high
level. I wanted to be able to say, okay,
I have a sphere and I want to union that
with a cube, and then I want a 3D
rendered version of this thing that I
have just expressed. So, Bobble is a
tool that gives you this very very high
level expressionoriented functional
language that it will then you use it to
express 3D shapes and then it compiles
down to hundreds of lines long shader
that will do the ray tracing for you and
it's based around sign distance
functions which are this really exciting
and really interesting way of modeling
3D space as pure functions. Let's talk
about this more. But what is a sign
distance function and why is it
interesting and why is it different from
the way that this is not the only
programmatic system for building 3D
designs? There are plenty of others out
there, but the sign distance function is
not something that all of them do. So
what's the point of that as an
abstraction here? Yeah. So assigned
distance function is literally a
function that takes a point in 3D space
and returns a float. And what that means
is what is the distance from this point
in space to the nearest point on a
surface. So for example, if you have a
sphere, the distance function is very
easy. It's an easy function to write.
You take the distance between the point
you're asking and the center of the
sphere and subtract the sphere's radius.
And that's literally that's it. That's
the function. The interesting thing
about them is that you can compose them.
So given two sign distance functions,
you can call them with the same point.
They'll give you two different values
for the distance. And then you could
average those two values together. And
now you have a new shape, which is if
you had a sphere and a box, now you have
something that's kind of halfway in
between the two. Or you could average
them only when they're very close
together in value. So the sort of edges
of the surface, the boundaries blend
smoothly together. And you can build a
lot of interesting shapes using these
just function composition, just calling
two functions, doing something
interesting with the value or doing
something interesting with the input to
the function. And you can use this to
express like crazy interesting
transformations in 3D space like I have
a cube and now I want a twisted cube.
You can just do that by manipulating the
input coordinate that you evaluate the
cube with at every point. It sounds very
abstract, but it is. But it actually
gives you something, right? It would
gives you like a richer kind of
composability to make it easier to take
different things and actually smash them
together in ways that make sense and in
a way where you could have somewhat
predictable visual outcomes of the
operations that you're doing. To
contrast this with traditional 3D
modeling, you have points, you have
triangles. It's kind of hard to do the
thing that I just described. If I have
two shapes and I want to like smoothly
blend them together, well, okay, I have
to like compute the surfaces of those
points and add a bunch of additional
points in order to express the curvature
because everything has to be a triangle.
And you sort of have this very different
representation that can do operations
that are hard to do if you were doing it
on a 3D mesh. But the other thing that's
weird about where you triangularize
everything or you turn these into
polygons is you have to kind of in
advance decide what is the granularity
at which you want to combine things and
then do the operations for joining
things together which first of all can
lead to weird artifacts right where it's
like you know I create a sphere over
here and a square over there or and cube
over there you know the sphere has some
pretty it's not really a sphere it's now
some weird triangulated shape and then
the edge where the two things merge is
going to have weird zigzag pieces
because terms of where the two grids now
interact is this idealized idea of a
sphere. It is this pure function that
represents a sphere. And if you actually
wanted to 3D print that, you could
materialize that function into a
triangle mesh if you wanted to export it
to another program or do something else
with it. But as you're writing your
program to produce these 3D shapes, you
just think of it as this pure function.
It is an infinite resolution sphere and
I can do anything with it and compose it
with anything else and I get things
right. In some sense, you step away with
these triangulation tools from the
infinite resolution thing very early and
in this kind of systems, you step away
late. Yeah, actually you talked about
these signed distance functions where
you can now compose things together. I
think you were lying to me because you
said they were assigned distance
functions and I think I don't believe
you, which is to say I think I can write
the sign distance function for a sphere
and I think I could maybe write the sign
distance function for a cube. But that
swizzling operation you described that
takes something and like transforms it
together. I feel like the thing you have
at the end probably is not literally a
signed distance function anymore. I run.
You're wrong. Yes, that is exactly
right. And I probably shouldn't call
these signed distance functions, but if
you want to research or learn more, that
is the literature that will describe
these. But they are no longer assigned
distance functions as soon as you start
performing certain transformations to
them. There are ways to compose signed
distance functions and get a perfect
distance function as a result. But a lot
of the really fun parts of it sort of
violate this invariant and you end up
with
approximations of a distance function
assigned distance-ish. It's yeah it's
like a signed proximity function. Maybe
the neat thing is that you can compose
these. But there is another really
important aspect of this which is that
you can ray trace them efficiently. It's
called ray marching when you do it to
assign distance function because you can
say okay I am looking at this point in
space. How close is the nearest shape?
and you ask your sign distance function,
it says ah you got like 60 units and
then you can just jump ahead 60 units
because you know that is the nearest
shape. You don't necessarily know if
it's in this direction but you know that
in every possible direction you could
travel space is empty up to a distance
of 60. So you can ray trace these in a
very very few number of steps which is
what makes you able to write real-time
animations that run on your GPU at high
resolution of like you're not literally
ray tracing it. You're doing this using
the distance function information in
order to skip parts of space when you
don't have a perfect sign distance
function. You can do things like skip
past it or jump into the middle of a
shape because ah the approximation at
this point is not the same as the
approximation when I actually jump
forward. So these are things that you
have to think about if you're using sign
distance functions to make art and
animations. And there's various
mitigations that you can use to make
evaluation slower, but at the same time
it's more fun to play with these bizarre
not quite distance safe shapes that
you've constructed. So the ones that
violate the rules are fun in their own
right because they create weird visual
artifacts when you render them and have
strange behaviors all their own. Yeah.
or like I want to take this 3D shape and
extrude it along a bezier curve that
produces something that is you know it's
so close to a signed distance function
that you can still get a good-look image
out of it but if you then want to use
that as the input to another operation
now you're kind of in trouble because
you started with an approximation and
you did some math to it now you have
like a really bad approximation so
there's a lot of these rules and things
that you learn as you play around with
these shapes so if you go to
bobble.studio studio. And I encourage
people who are listening to go to
bubble.studio. One thing you will
immediately notice is way too nice. It's
like a really fun, really pleasantly
designed little app. You know, you get
to on the left hand side of the screen
write a little program in literally your
Ian's favorite dialect of lisp that
describes the image there. And I just
wonder like how did you find the time to
do this kind of project? It seems like
really quite an investment. I think part
of the fun of sign distance functions is
that they're way easier than they look.
It's so easy to write this sort of ray
marcher. People have been doing this a
lot and they've learned how to do this.
So I am in some sense just packaging up
a lot of different things that other
smart people have already figured out
into a single tool. It uses code mirror
which gives you this very polished
environment when I have a small amount
of code to generate autocomplete and
stuff but mostly that's just code mirror
and code mirror is really good. So it
looks polished and you can produce some
pretty goodlook 3D renders. But I
learned how to do all of this from
watching what Inigo Keilles is doing and
using a lot of his primitive functions
that he's already figured out and a lot
of the methods that are used by other
people on shader toy. So I think it's
actually looks a lot more impressive
than it really is. I spent a lot of time
building this highle compiler and
there's some bits of it that are more
bespoke things that I wanted like you
can interactively edit numbers in the
code editor because it's kind of hard to
create a 3D image just by typing in
numbers if you're writing a color. It's
nice to just be able to drag and drop
things or if you're positioning things
you can just drag vector literals around
the screen and Oh, right. There's I
think we go to a number and click on and
drag to the right or the left and have
the number like interactively move and
then also the image interactively
changes as you do that. So you can kind
of try and pick the number that actually
looks right in a nice way. Yeah. So
there's some amount of bespoke work that
went into that. But yeah, it took a long
time. I don't know. How long did the
project actually take? It's hard to say
exactly. I think I've probably worked on
it seriously for around five months.
It's been my main side project total.
Hard to say. I worked on a lot of it
while I was on parental leave. So that
is where I found the time was during
naps. But I don't have nearly as much
time to improve it since. Right. And now
you have a kid who probably naps less.
Yep. So you've also done a bunch of fun
physical projects. Maybe you can tell us
a little bit about some of those. Sure.
So a recent one is adding 3D mesh export
to Bobble so I can do 3D printing.
That's been kind of fun getting a little
bit into that. I've built some musical
instruments. That's something that I
don't really play any musical
instruments, but it's surprisingly easy
to solder together a microcontroller to
a bunch of buttons and then program it
to do interesting MIDI things. I built a
mechanical keyboard and it's like
shockingly easy to do and I was like,
"Okay, I can design and build bespoke
MIDI instruments now just using a lot of
the same techniques and that's one of my
hobbies." Do you ever play them and make
music with them or is it purely
ridiculous, Ron?
I try to get my baby to play them, but
he has so far not taken to them. You
also made a corded keyboard. One of my
MIDI keyboards was this experimental
corded input mechanism where holding
down different sets of keys would give
you different notes in a stable way that
I don't know. It was an interesting
experiment that doesn't really have a
physical analog. Part of the fun of
making electronic instruments is you're
not constrained by like I need to put
holes on a tube somewhere to get the
right frequencies. You can do all these
weird things and like have instruments
that move relative to one another like
this button just goes up by a semmit
tone rather than having absolute pitch.
There's a lot of freedom and fun design
space to explore building custom
instruments and then never performing
with them. Yeah, it's fun to build them.
Also, ask me how many things I've made
in Bobble. It's much more fun to build
Bobble than to actually make art with
it. Although I've seen some of them,
they're pretty cute. Another fun aspect
of Bobble itself is you ended up using
this somewhat obscure lisp variant
called Janet as the programming language
for Bobble. And I'm curious what got you
there. Why did you end up using this?
You know, I feel I often describe Okamel
as comically obscure, but I think Janet
is even more comically obscure than
Okamel. Extremely obscure. Yeah, it
seemed obvious, and I can't justify
this, but it seemed obvious that the way
that you should express 3D shapes in a
programming language would be some kind
of lisp. That's a very hipster opinion.
Just the notational like I wanted
something extremely concise and I wanted
things like variatic functions. I don't
know in contrast to Okamel. Well, is a
little bit verbose and I like that for
building a real application, but I
wanted something where I could build a
very concise notation for expressing
different combinations. So, it clearly
seemed like s expressions were a good
way to do this, right? For those who are
like not listic, just a really
unpleasant number of parenthesis. Every
single thing is parenthesized. That's in
some sense almost the only syntax
affordances like PN function arguments
close PN and everything just kind of
builds off of that. Bobble actually has
a lot of lisp blasphemy built into it to
give you sort of postfix function
application and also infix functions. Oh
yeah, you're not supposed to do that in
you're not supposed to do that but it is
very very nice for expressing GLSL
languages. I wanted some amount of
notational freedom also because GLSL
despite being like relatively low level
has surprisingly nice notational
affordances for manipulating vectors. So
something that you can do in GLSL is if
you have a threedimensional vector, you
can write
vec.xy and you get a new vector that's
the first component and the first
component again and then the second
component and there's this neat concise
swizzling operations that you can do and
also various operations that are
overloaded to like do the right thing on
vectors and that's all very nice. I
didn't want to lose that notational
concision even as I added more
notational concision. So the language
that Babel uses is really modified Janet
with some custom macros for that makes
it a little bit easier to type
sequentially without having to go and
wrap your parents and keep them
balanced. Right. And I guess that's like
the other thing that makes lists
different is they have really good macro
systems. Yeah. The fact that I could get
this level of control over I really want
the program to look exactly like this. I
can get that syntax without having to
write my own parser, without having to
do that. That was an appealing aspect of
it. And then you wrote a book about
Janet. How did that happen? So I had so
much fun building Bobble in part because
I wanted to use Janet because Janet can
very easily compile to web assembly. And
I don't know, I thought it would be more
fun to do the whole compiler in the
language that you use to express the
language as opposed to parse this
notation and then execute it in
JavaScript or in OAML or something else.
So really all of Bobble and its compiler
are written in Janet. I thought this was
really fun to write this web app that is
not heavily JavaScript. And embedding
Janet in the web was both really nice
and really pleasant and also very
difficult to get started with. But I
wanted more people to be able to do
this. I wanted to like make it easier on
the next person who comes along and
says, I want to make a live coding
environment using an obscure list in the
browser. And so many people are in that
position. So, I wrote a book about Janet
because I think it's a really well
thought out and really well-considered
language that I just matches my personal
taste very well. And I found I really
liked it a lot more than I was expecting
to when I started using it. And I wanted
it to have more exposure. So, I wrote a
book that no one's read about Janet. And
it actually worked. Someone actually
made a live music coding environment
inspired by the live coding environment
in the book and like based on the source
code forked it and made a live music
environment called train t r a ne. Is
that named after cold train or like I
kind of guessed that when I read it but
I don't know the actual anomology and
it's a delightful site. It has this very
idiosyncratic UI that looks like a
Windows command prompt. It's nice. It
was nice that someone actually was like,
"Yeah, I also want to build a weird art
playground using this weird language."
So, you've spent an enormous amount of
time on lots of different kinds of
personal projects. I'm curious to what
degree that experience has changed how
you think about programming in other
contexts. So, I feel like everything
that I have done for fun, I've
ultimately ended up using somehow at
work. And I think maybe part of that is
because I've worked on a lot of
different areas. So I like have more
opportunities for this, but not that I
would ever have expected this and it's
not the reason why I'm making goofy side
projects or art projects, but I've
always learned something and then within
like a year somehow unpredictably
something comes up such that I get to
use the knowledge that I learned. And I
think having exposure to a lot of
different programming languages, I've
always been interested in programming
languages from a theoretical standpoint.
And I think that thinking about how
different languages solve problems helps
immensely for modeling problems in any
specific language. The experience of
using Haskell for a couple years to
build what I thought were trivial
applications and building them in
completely different ways because I'm
dealing with immutable state for the
first time and learning how to think
differently about that. I think that
that's very mindexpanding and has given
me more tools to approach like modeling
problems. Also, I don't know, still
learning obviously. I wouldn't say that
I've gotten good because I've written a
bunch of different side projects, but I
have learned a lot of different ways to
approach problems that have helped me
out in real life. Have you learned
anything from Janet in particular? Janet
was my first experience with the
language. I'm not a Lisp person and I
wasn't really looking for a lisp
language apart from this dabbling with
closure earlier in my life. I never got
into the macro system. I never really
appreciated this aspect of lisp. I kind
of thought this was like a dumb weird I
don't know. I don't really like it and
it seems weird. And with Janet, it was
the first time that I'd really used a
language with a powerful macro system
and really embraced that and tried to
really learn it and understand how I
could use it to write programs better.
And I think it's very mindexpanding to
think about writing code that is
executing at compile time but is
producing code that will execute at
runtime and this blend between the
compile time and runtime environment.
Janet when you compile a program it
produces like an image which is
something that no language that I had
used before Janet I know that's like an
old technique and small talks do this
and lists have done this forever but
Janet was my first experience to this
type of programming where instead of
compiling to a bunch of machine code
that exists and is static you're sort of
building this full runtime state and
then writing that down to disk and then
later when you run your program you're
resuming from this like snapshot in time
and And what this means is you can do
compile time computation and produce a
complex object graph at compile time and
then write it down and restore it later
and keep going. I thought that was
really mindexpanding and a really
powerful technique that I don't have a
good way to apply to any other language
because it kind of takes a lot of
language buyin to be able to serialize
arbitrary program state to disk. And
this isn't just values. This is like I
have a co- routine that is in the middle
of executing and I'm able to suspend
that exactly as it is and write that to
disk and then resume it later. You can
serialize closures over the network and
like send them to a remote process and
then execute the closure. Having this
live code that you can freeze and then
restore later is kind of a mindexpanding
thing. I've always thought of this as
like a terrifying feature of small talk
because the way small talk people use it
historically, at least the way I've
understood it is not just I write my
program and then there's a kind of
multi-stage process where it does some
stuff and then you freeze it and then
maybe you take that thing and ship it
and then that's your final program as
their development environment. So they
just have this binary soup of artifacts
that they've just made over time as they
have been working. It's no longer a
program that you can read really. you
know, there's some code and there's some
data and it all just kind of lives
together in this complicated soup. I
don't know how to build careful high
assurance software in that kind of mode.
Yeah, it kind of sounds crazy to me and
I haven't tried it. And you can do this
in Janet as well. You can start running
your program, you can modify it and then
you can at any point save it back to
disk. You can like take a snapshot. But
the way that I have used it and I think
Janet's a small enough language that I
shouldn't say like idiomatic but like
the normal thing that you do is this
really two-phase thing where you are
running your program up to a point and
then you stop and then you're always
resuming the program from that exact
same point. So all of your code all of
the things that you've written on disk
you can always sort of deterministically
as long as your compilation is
deterministic like get back to that
state. The state of your image is a
reflection of the code as you've written
it, as you have it in source control.
It's not this mutable target that you're
interactively changing. It sounds very
errorprone. I know that small talk gives
you like the history of every change
that you've ever made so that you can
like you're not like totally hosed, but
it still sounds wild to me and I've
never tried to program like that. Yeah.
I mean, I feel like it could be a good
environment for playing around with
data, but it doesn't feel to me like a
great environment for building a very
careful piece of software that you need
to make sure is actually doing the right
thing all the time. I mean, beyond the
image and the fact that you're like
working on the same program
interactively over a long period of time
because you're able to serialize the
entire state to disk, but a common way
that you write list programs is this
interactive thing as well where it's not
maybe quite as long running, but you
write code and then you evaluate chunks
of your code at a time and you're like
redefining your program at runtime.
Yeah, I think multi-stage programming is
a good and important thing among the
various good ideas embedded in lisp. The
macro system and more generally this
kind of notion of multi-stage
programming is something that lisps have
done really well from a long time ago
and very few other language ecosystems
have done a good job of it. There's the
whole like okml hasll world and I think
that's a world that's been really good
at types and very mediocre at macros and
multi-stage programming and then the
lisp world is one that's been the
reverse very good at thinking about
macro systems and how to use them
effectively and the type story being
much weaker and more complicated and
harder to use. you're talking about it's
hard to use this in other contexts. We
are actually like literally at the
moment working on stuff to add some of
this power to a camel at the moment in a
kind of more static and limited way.
Right? I think it sounds like the Janet
story is like fairly flexible and
arbitrary multi-stage programming. And
we're looking more at stuff where you
can do runtime code generation and maybe
do runtime code generation at multiple
spots in your program, but not quite the
same thing as like stopping and freezing
your whole program and restarting it
again with all of the state there. But
that itself, I think, is already very
useful. And I think having an
understanding of how to work in that
environment, I think, is a thing that's
going to become more relevant as we get
more of those language features landed.
Okay. Okay. So anyway, that's a like
lessons learned by working on personal
projects that you've been able to adopt
more generally or at least influenced
your thinking beyond there. How about
the other direction? Are there things
that you've learned from the way you've
programmed here at Jane Street that's
influenced what you do in your personal
projects and what you've learned beyond
that domain? So Jane Street has this way
of writing tests, this expect test
workflow. Jane Street's not the only
place that does this, but it was my
first exposure to this. And I kind of
just can't believe that it's not the
industry standard thing that everyone is
doing everywhere. It's so much better in
so many ways that I kind of can't live
without it. It's also like the
image-based programming thing in that at
first it sounds like a really bad idea.
Yeah. A lot of people when they hear
about this, they sort of are objecting
to it. So what this is specifically is
I'm going to write a test and it's going
to do something and it's going to
produce some output and I'm just going
to save that output to the file. I write
a test that edits itself. It's going to
modify the test code itself to embed the
output of some function or whatever into
that test and then I can sort of use
this like an interactive ripple where I
write some code, I run it and then I
have the result in my file in the exact
same file that I wrote it. like it has
literally patched the file on disk. It's
not like I'm running it in a ripple and
I see some transient result and then
it's saved and it's when I go back if I
run the test again it'll tell me if it
is different. So the way that I can use
this to write code is like very similar
to the way that I wrote code without any
tests at all which is I write some code
and then I run it and then I see if it
did what I wanted and if it did great I
move on and if it didn't I go and I fix
it until it is good and then once I've
done that I sort of save it and mark it
as okay that was the thing that I wanted
and I use this interactive workflow when
I'm just developing code and exploring
it because it's just this really great
feedback loop for seeing results. And
maybe the most relatable analogy of this
is it's kind of like a plain text Python
notebook. Yeah, Python notebooks you
write some code. There's like a block
that has the output of the code that you
wrote and then you kind of do that over
and over again. Except in the Python
notebook case, you have this sort of
interesting property that there are no
guarantees that the stuff that's in the
notebook reflects what would happen if
you reran the notebook from beginning to
end. The experience of a notebook is
this kind of choose your own adventure
of which cell do I want to evaluate now
which is I think often important in the
Python notebook world because various of
the steps could be really slow. So you
kind of want to make the choice of like
which parts you want to actually redo.
But with expect test the idea is you
have a file with one of these tests.
Every time you rerun the test it just
runs from beginning to end. It
regenerates all of the output. It checks
it's the same as it was last time and if
it's the same as it was last time that's
the test passing. And if it's different,
that counts as a failure. And it
rewrites it with a new data. And you can
choose with a click of a button, do I
want to adopt this new version of the
output or do I want to keep with what
was there before? Yeah. And this sounds
a little bit crazy. It sounds crazy in a
lot of ways. Like the description that I
gave initially is not the best way to
write tests, just playing around in a
ripple. Like you kind of want to be
thoughtful about the exact things that
you're testing. You want to test precise
properties. But it is both a valuable
workflow as you're writing code, but
then you can also produce very
highquality tests because you're not
just writing a traditional test where
you're writing some assertion about some
property, which of course we do a lot
and is a very useful tool to have, but
you can write something that is more a
general observation of my program state
like I have some property. I want to
observe it and I want to know if this
property is ever different. So we have
some interesting examples of you know I
want to do a bunch of work and I'm
producing a side project where I've used
this for example it's like a board game
okay a bunch of things happen I have
some state just print out the board game
and that's an expect test now I can see
I have done this too this is like an
excellent use case it's great not only
are you going to know when if you ever
break your board you're going to be able
to see that but it's useful when a bug
happens you kind of have this
observation of your program state that
helps you debug it it's not just oh some
assertion failed, some test failed. It's
like some test failed and also here is
the state and here's what the state was
supposed to be. And you can sort of
immediately be like, oh, okay, like I
see how this happened. And this of
course is still compatible with like
traditional assertion based testing. We
still write property tests, but we use
the same technique when we write
property tests such that you found a
failing case. Okay, I'm going to go and
like edit the source code of your test
to insert the failing case and remember
it so that future randomized runs will
make sure that they handle like this
interesting regression. It is this
mechanism for writing tests that can
modify themselves that is really useful
for observing properties of your program
but then is also just a really good UI
for writing all kinds of tests. Another
thing I like about it is I feel like it
helps resolve what I think of as like
one of the fundamental trade-offs in
building programming systems. I often
think about two extremes of you write a
traditional program in some text file
versus you write some computation in
Excel, right? And I think the good thing
about the text file version is you get
this very compact, easy to read version
of the code. And the downside is you
can't see what it's doing. You can't see
the data as it flows through the
program. And then in something like
Excel, the data is really easy. It's
just like cells out there. You can just
inspect and understand what's going on.
and any particular computation, you can
kind of poke at it and see where the
data came from and what it's doing. But
the program is like smeared over the
spreadsheet all over these cells and
it's like very non-compact, very hard to
read. And this lets you resolve this
duality and that you like both get the
compact representation of the program.
And you can pick custom like laying out
of essentially program traces. So you
can see and visualize aspects of the
execution of the program. It's really
cool for code review because when you
make a change that's supposed to change
the behavior, you get to read in the
same commit both the change to the code
and the delta to the program trace.
Yeah. Which is not to say that the whole
thing can't be abused. I think one of
the reasons people think of this at
first blush as kind of a bad idea is it
just seems like you'll get a bunch of
tests where people dump garbage and say,
"And now I've tested it." And that's a
real problem. It is. People in fact do
get this wrong. A really good expect
test is where one has really thought
carefully about what data do I actually
want to visualize? How do I actually
want to represent this and kind of
minify it so you don't have a bunch of
distracting nonsense and the end result
is actually readable and worth reading.
Yeah, it's a real failure case to just
say like, oh, okay, tell me if anything
possibly changes, but you really need to
be careful and diligent. But the work
that you do, it's not just in order to
write your test better. The work that
you do to visualize your state better
also makes it easier to change your
program over time. you like get this
virtuous feedback where you spend time
building these test visualizers to make
your tests clearer and easier and then
they also just make it easier to make
changes. So it was the first time where
I really felt like okay I'm writing
tests for myself like it is actually
just making my job easier. The more
tests I write the easier it is to build
more and more complex interesting
software and it doesn't feel like it's
adding this cost where like ah okay now
I got to like go write tests after. It's
like but it's kind of fun. Yeah it is.
And it just is the way that you interact
with your program, right? In the same
way that playing in a ripple or in a
notebook is like a fun way to knock
around, writing expect test is fun. So
if you want to use Janet, first thing I
had to write of course was a complex
macro that does this patching of the
source code so that I have the same
workflow in Janet because I'm spoiled
and I I can't write code without it
anymore. The history of expect is kind
of interesting in that it's definitely
not our idea. We stole it actually very
concretely from Mercurial which has this
set of tests that they built internally
which are basically like expect test for
bash where you like write some bash
commands and you see the output and
there's like a little single unified
file format. I think they called it
their unified test because it unifies
the output of the test and the code that
generates it. And then somebody went off
and built a tool called CRAM. I think
hasn't been touched in several years but
it's another version of this idea
generalized beyond Mercurial. And then
we built some version of it and did a
lot of blogging about it because we
thought it was kind of fun. And there's
several Python versions of this that
have been built. I think the idea didn't
come from us, but I think we've been
involved in the set of people slowly
popularizing it and spreading it out in
more cases. And it's kind of been nice
to see it get out into the world. Yeah.
It's also something that Jane Street
does that's a little bit idiosyncratic,
but is unlike using Okamel or using
Bonsai for everything like something
that anyone could do. This is an idea
that is completely language agnostic and
there are libraries for doing this in
almost every language and if there's not
you should write one because it's a very
good workflow. I have the tooling is
frustratingly hard like every now and
then. Yeah. So I've now had the
experience of teaching my kids how to
program which I guess you're not quite
there yet almost a few years and one of
the frustrating things is how poor the
testing frameworks are. you get some
thing in class of like write the
following system and they're often
fairly hard assignments and they're hard
to get right and maybe you're doing it
in languages like C and C++ where
there's all sorts of weird cliffs you
can fall over and then just no good
testing tools and ah that's no way to
live and so I've looked around for like
good ways of doing things like expect
tests C programs and like h the
landscape's not great there yeah Jane
Street's Okiml tooling in Emacs around
this you save the file and you
immediately see a diff of all of your
tests and then there's like one button
that lets if you copy in the the output
to promote it to this is the good
version like that tooling is actually
really important to making this
pleasant. So yeah, I've had to
reimplement that unfortunately.
Amazing. All right. Well, thank you so
much for joining me. This was a lot of
fun. Thanks, Ron.
You'll find a complete transcript of the
episode along with show notes and links
at
signalsandthreads.com. One thing I
wanted to mention is that as you may
have noticed, the pace of releasing new
episodes has slowed down a bit. Don't
worry, we're not going anywhere. In
fact, we've got a bunch of episodes
planned that I'm really excited about.
But things have been busy and I do
expect the pace to be a bit slower going
forward. Anyway, thanks for joining us.
See you next time.